# Feedback 2022-12-09

## Editor

Dear Richel,

> Many thanks again for participating in the anthology “Perspectives to Paradata - Research and Practices of Documenting Data Processes”. Refereeing for your chapter has been completed and I’m glad to say that the reviewers thought it was an interesting and relevant contribution to the volume that should be accepted with only minor revisions.

Yay, that is great! Also, the feedback -and especially criticism- of both 
reviewers were of great help to improve this article. One can see
in the GitHub repository of the article how many commits they have caused :-)

> You can find the comments of the two independent reviewers below. Please also make a specific note of the following feedback:
> 
> Think about the line of argument from the beginning of the chapter to the end. 
> It works mostly rather well but sometimes you have rather abrupt transitions, 
> individual claims and notes that are not discussed in much detail 
> and make following the text unnecessarily difficult. 
> Your examples, both in the introduction and the genetic epidemiology 
> but you use them rather little in the text. 
> By using these fields to exemplify why publishing code, 
> taking care of sensitive data etc. would make your argument much stronger.

Thinking about the line of the argument from the beginning
to the end has been one of the most influential points: 
the article was a mix of three standpoints and 
I've reduced it to one.
Additionally, examples are reused more often.

> I am also inclined to agree with the first reviewer in 
> that it would improve the text if you would nuance your discussion 
> a little by acknowledging that there are also 
> problems and limitations to assuming code as a perfect form of paradata, 
> and e.g. that keeping it more or less automatically makes research reproducible.

Yup, I agree and I think I did so.

> Be careful with the style. 
> A book chapter like this can be somewhat more conversational 
> than an average journal article, 
> but colloquialisms are still not exactly encouraged. 
> Check e.g. for abbreviations I’ll vs. I will etc.

Thanks for this guideline: I have made the text more formal.

> When you switch from Vancouver system to (Springer) Harvard system of referencing, 
> check at the same time how you refer to earlier work. 
> Preferably spell out researchers names and studies e.g.  “example is described in [11]” ⇒ example is described by XX and YY.

Thanks for pointing this out. I now use Springer's LaTeX template with the
desired referencing system.

> Remember to tell what the things you mention are. 
> Right now it might sound unnecessary to tell what GitHub is 
> but in a few years no one might remember anymore what it was.

I agree, I think I do a better job now.

> You have a tendency to make strong claims (which is fine) 
> but make sure that you don’t contradict yourself 
> and make strong claims that are too easy to challenge. 
> E.g. you insinuate that code is not published that often but write 
> also “Code is commonly published alongside of a paper, 
> pasted as text in the Supplementary Materials” ⇒ 
> that code would be commonly published.

I strongly agreed with this. Restructuring and reviewing the chapter 
multiple times have hopefully fixed this.

> The abstract reads right now more like a part of the argument 
> than an abstract (summary, description) of the chapter as a whole.

I agree. I changed the abstract completely.

#### Introduction

> You could think about the structure of the introduction 
> to make the line of argument clearer.

Agreed. Restructuring and reviewing the chapter 
multiple times have hopefully fixed this.

> The vignette in the beginning of the introduction is good 
> but does not connect with what follows.

Agreed, the exemplary scientists make a return in the middle and 
at the end of the chapter.

> p1 l 43 The sentence starting here would need references.

The reviewer is right: I wrote 'Paradata does not have a clear definition 
yet (hence this book)' from hearsay at the meeting.
This is, in retrospect, nonsense: I have had the time to read up 
on that part of the literature and now I cite some papers that do 
give definitions.

> p2 Paradata figure is really informative. 
> Considering that there is really no consensus on what paradata is, 
> it might be good to formulate the text as a proposition 
> i.e. if paradata is understood in this way, it would imply that.

Thanks so much for this feedback! It has actually been the one most influential
statements in revising the paper. One can now observe in the introduction
how I -indeed- follow the implications of code being paradata, following
'Improving the usefulness of research data with better paradata', Huvila, 2022.

> The usual order of conclusions and discussion is 
> first to have a discussion and then conclusion. 
> Also now the discussion reads more like a recap of what has been said already 
> with stuff that sounds more like (practical) implications. 
> Maybe the recap could be done in the conclusions 
> and the practical implications could be place right before them in a separate section?

I changed the order, after which I restructured and reviewed a lot. 
I think it is now way better!

> In addition to this, make sure to check the beginning of your chapter 
> and make sure that it clearly tells heads up:
>
> * What is the domain discussed (e.g. archaeology, survey research) explained in terms that make sense for a non-expert.

I think this domain is explained reasonably well. I cut the table with
definitions of terms, however, to reduce the word count. 

> A very brief problem statement: Why paradata (or something related to it) 
> is an issue in that domain i.e. why paradata is (not) needed, 
> why it is (not) difficult etc.
>
> This helps non-specialists in your area of expertise to understand the context of your chapter and the reason why it was written and to be included in this volume.

I did so, closely adhering to the reasoning of 
'Improving the usefulness of research data with better paradata', Huvila, 2022. :-)

> Additional things to verify are:
>
> * Check that you have all the references in the list of references and that you cited 
>   all references in the list.

LaTeX does so automatically.

> * Check that the appropriate form of data in plural is used, i.e. data are.

Agreed, the plurality if 'data' was absent in some case. 
Now, I now always use 'data' as plural.

> When revising your text, please try to be mindful of the indicative max. number of words per chapter (5 000 words + references, in practice an ideal total number of words is around 7000).

Fixed, I copy from https://github.com/richelbilderbeek/chapter_paradata/actions/runs/4166014852/jobs/7209797864#step:11:9:

```
Words in text: 4915
```

> Check that you followed all of the stipulations in the author instructions 
> (September 2022) for the Perspectives to Paradata volume 
> at https://uppsala.box.com/s/r19l07ex4kdxwspz8400ojoz6tsseze0 
> in the Material for authors folder.

Yep, I added a checklist at the bottom of this document.

   * [ ] Check all of those

> Please consider these comments and make appropriate changes 
> to address them in your manuscript. 
> Submit the following documents directly to me by email:
>
> * Revised chapter manuscript
> * Short letter, briefly describing major revisions and/or decision to not revise in accordance with reviewer comments’.

 * [ ] Do so

> Send the two documents to me by email at the latest Feb 13, 2023. 

 * [ ] Do so

> There is also a possibility to join a Q&A in Zoom about paper revisions 
> Jan 17th, 2022 5pm-6pm CEST at https://uu-se.zoom.us/j/69966856109 (passcode: PARADATA).

Great that that options existed!

## Review 1

In general, I thoroughly enjoy this reviewer 'pushing back' by criticising this
paper. Thanks so much for doing so!

### Overall Comments

> The paper seems to purposefully have a provocative title and theme, 
> and I think that's OK. 
> However, we do need to consider the audience and 
> whether they will know that it is controversial and why. 
> A computer science audience would know, 
> and would probably be able to come up with multiple arguments against the theme, 
> possibly pushing back very strongly. 
> This would be an interesting conversation; 
> I don't mean to imply that the theme of this chapter is absolutely wrong.
> The three biggest arguments against the thesis are:

Thanks for this feedback. I have streamlined, restructured and reviewed the
paper, making it less controversial: among others, I no longer
claim in the title that code is more important than the paper.

> * Code is generally considered to be difficult, sometimes near impossible, 
>   to understand. So, while code might be a clear and complete encoding 
>   of the paradata for some research, it is a poor way to communicate 
>   that paradata to humans.

I agree with this point. The original idea behind this point, that could
be phrased like 'reading code is more important than reading the paper',
has been phased out. Instead, the paper talks more about best practices in
general.

> * Programmers typically these days write code that draws on libraries and 
>   interfaces written by others, and so is infrequently self-contained. 
>   Thus, even if the code written for some research happens to be 
>   extraordinarily clear for humans, understanding it fully likely 
>   requires great contextual knowledge about the software written by others 
>   that is merely reused. Even if code is "self contained", 
>   its operation may be altered by tools use to compile or run 
>   it (compiler, environments like Matlab, even operating systems and hardware).

I agree. The paper has been watered down to less strong claims in that regard,
with less focus on the reading of code. Containers are mentioned 
and discussed to the extent I felt would fit best.

> It is generally considered to be difficult to predict the behaviour of complex software, 
> even if one understands the code. 
> This is a fundamental outgrowth of the discrete nature of software. 
> Therefore, while the code may be a complete encoding of the paradata 
> that produced certain data, 
> even if the software is understood 
> it may not be the case that the underlying meaning behind the data is understandable. 
> Thus, the paper becomes not mere optional metadata, 
> but essential interpretation of something 
> that otherwise would be opaque to anyone who didn't write the code 
> (and, often, after a short while, even those who wrote the code).

I agree. Instead of staying with the old claim that code is more important
than a paper, the paper has become more of a follow-up on 
'Improving the usefulness of research data with better paradata', Huvila, 2022,
with less controversial claims.

> * So, some might argue that the code is only trivially considerable as 
>   paradata, or that it is paradata that is only consumable by computers, 
>   and that the paper (or supplements to the paper) is essential to 
>   understand the paradata.

Again, the paper has changed its main stance :-)

> The abstract shades the more provocative title. 
> It is certainly true that the code is the true encoding 
> of the paradata and is primary when there is disagreement with the 
> research paper. Moreover, open/reproducible science would demand that 
> the code be supplied. That doesn't mean that the code is stand-alone.

I agree and us agreeing on this can be found in the paper.

> * Overall, I think this chapter could trigger interesting debates of many 
>   kinds, but given the venue it would be good if this chapter embodied 
>   the possible debates, rather than merely taking one point of view and 
>   leaving it to the reader to develop (unanswered) counter-arguments in 
>   their mind. However, I recognise that that opinion may not match the 
>   opinion of the editors.

I agree and in the end the chapter took a different turn and became
less controversial.

### Detailed Comments

#### Introduction

> It is often the case that the code changes over time as the research progresses. 
> Guaranteeing that there is a perfect match between code and results 
> can also be difficult; in fact, it can easily be the case 
> that different results in the same paper connect to different versions of the code, 
> often with subtle differences. 
> So, it may not be the case that an experiment can be re-done easily 
> without careful data/software provenance 
> that carefully tracks the precise version of code that produced each result (1,2).
>
> Citations
>  * L. Pouchard, S. Baldwin, T. Elsethagen, S. Jha, B. Raju, E. Stephan, L. Tang, and K.K. Van Dam, "Computational reproducibility of scientific workflows at extreme scales", Int. J. High Perf. Comp. Appl., vol. 33, pp. 763–777, 2019.
>  * J. Conquest and M. Stiber, "Software and Data Provenance as a Basis for eScience Workflow", IEEE eScience, September 2021.

I agree. As the chapter started focusing more on making code useful paradata,
these facts faded away from the final paper. I hope you'll agree about that choice!

> Having written that, it is an excellent point 
> that computational research that does not supply software 
> is inherently less valuable, and under some circumstances potentially suspect.

I think you'll be happy to find some references to the literature on that :-)

> Not only does supplying software better support reproducibility 
> and so increase trust in conclusions, 
> it also enables discovery of bugs that can invalidate results. 
> Producing results that are potentially falsifiable 
> is inherently more valuable that producing results 
> that cannot (easily) be falsified. 
> (Some would argue that the latter is not even science.)

I agree and to some extent this has made it into the paper.
The Popperian falsification, however, has not, although I do agree!

> Figure 1: The text in the figure is too small and cannot be read without significantly magnifying the document.

Yup, I agree and it is fixed now.

> Is figure 1 simplistic? Does metadata only pertain to paradata in 
> computational research (left)? In other words, can only reconstruct 
> metadata given output data and code? 
> Maybe. 
> However, it certainly is the case that a paper is not mere metadata; 
> doesn't a paper also interpret output data — assign meaning and 
> context within the field of study (right)? 
> Is that really something one can extract from the code?

I agree that the paper and the results shape each other
and indicated that with a double-headed arrow.

> The ending of the introduction shades the claims of this chapter even more. 
> Perhaps what is meant is that the code is primary 
> and the methods section of a paper is secondary. 
> I'm not suggesting that you gut the provocation of this paper's title/theme, 
> but maybe that you shade it more clearly, 
> and maybe earlier, 
> as written deliberately to provoke thought and conversation about 
> paradata and eScience.

I kicked out the original provocative title. Thanks, however, for 
encouraging me to keep it!

> But I will say that reading the code rarely allows one 
> to assess the trustworthiness of the experiment, 
> because it is a rare situation where the code can be read and understood!

Again, I think the need to this argument has decreased and less strong
claims on that are made :-)

> OTOH, having the code may allow reuse, assuming that there is a 
> reliable mechanism to collect together the execution environment, 
> including correct versions of all of the third-party dependencies.

I hope that the discussion on virtual containers address this to your liking :-)

> Why is table S1 so far from its internal use?

The reason was that some journals require such tables to be 
at the bottom of the document.
However, I have moved it to the Supplementary Materials,
due to the word count.
I hope this is OK.

> **[Note to the editors]**: there may be a need to have a single 
> glossary for the book, or a consistent format/location for glossaries 
> within each chapter.

For the editors :-)

Note that I would agree.

#### Genetic epidemiology

> **[Note to the editors]**: might need to consider style to use to use 
> citations as nouns within sentences.

I made my citations more consistent.

> You mention "table S3", and because there is no table S3 in your chapter, 
> I assume that this is a table in citation #2. This raises the question of 
> why you have a table numbered "S1", which causes the reader to be confused here.

I fixed this. Reason was that there are two PDFs being created, one for the
book and one as an online publication: the latter has more images and tables.

> I think that it's fine to have an informal style, 
> but using phrases like "spoiler alert" is distracting 
> and does not improve readability.

I agree, thanks! I think the tone is way better now :-)

> L. 133: typo: "fictuous" --> "fictitious"

Thanks! Done! And I now run a CI spellcheck as well.

###  Code is…

> I don't think that the idea that code is paradata should be controversial, 
> so good to state that clearly.

I agree: now the paper more explores how code is useful paradata.

> It's a very good point that software is commonly not made available.
> Reproducibility/replicability and open science is still in a 
> sad state in many cases, as indicated.

I think you'll be happy to see many references to the literature
that find the extent of this sad state. Spoiler: yes, it is sad,
but not all sad findings are recent.

> How unique is the "code vs. description" aspect of paradata in this case 
> different than other areas? There is always the case that we deal with 
> descriptions of processes, rather than the processes themselves. 
> The distinction is more that, in the case of software-enabled activities, 
> we have code that (more or less) completely describes the 
> process — the algorithms. In other cases, we don't (unless there 
> happens to be something like video of the processes, which would be 
> highly unusual). So, I think there is an important point here.

I do not compare to other cases and I feel that is OK. 
I hope you'll agree.

> L. 225: Indicates work by the author, but the author of this paper 
> is not the author of the reference cited.

Agree, I intended to reference a paper in which I discovered a mistake.
However, this little anecdote has been removed.

#### There are multiple...

> * This is a good summary
> * §4.1, ¶2: repeats previous points.

I restructured the text multiple times, so these duplication should be gone now.

> * Lines 278-286: This is true, but I'm not sure what this contributes to the chapter.

I restructured the text multiple times and I put it in a more fitting chapter.

>  * L. 297: spell out "FAIR"?

FAIR is not mentioned anymore.

> * §4.2:
>   * might also mention Zenodo.org, supported by CERN.

I feel Zenodo is not a standard code hosting site. 
If I am wrong, I'd be happy to be corrected.

>   * Sites like GitHub provide metadata: 
>     This is true. So, we have metadata about paradata. 
>     In fact, features such as continuous integration scripts 
>     and other tools that support the process of software development 
>     means that the code (paradata) has its own paradata!

Yep, I agree and I hope you're happy to see that I -among others-
now discuss how the commit history allows for transparency in who-did-what.

>   * L. 351: broken figure reference

Fixed.

> * L. 378 onward: Besides the "decay" of software over time, 
>   there is also the issue that a particular publication needs to be 
>   connected to a particular version of software in a repository. 
>   If software is changing over time, publications at different points 
>   in time will likely connect to different versions of the software. 
>   As a result, understanding the results across multiple publications, 
>   even if coming from a single lab, could require careful consideration 
>   to understand if they are comparable (or if the changes in software render 
>   them incomparable). Unfortunately, this may even be true about different 
>   pieces of the results in a single paper. (This is an amplification of the 
>   good points in the paragraph starting on line 390).

I agree with this point, yet I felt it was not important enough to make
it into the paper. As the paper changed substantially, I hope you'll agree.

> * §4.3
>   * Not clear what the "access rights" comment means on line 417.

These used to be user access right. The paragraph got scrapped however.

>   * Containers like Docker and Singularity alleviate some problems, 
>     but introduce others. First of all, they require users to learn new tools 
>     they may be unfamiliar with. Second, they may require installation of 
>     new software to run them. Third, they themselves are third-party software 
>     that can introduce unexpected dependencies, weaknesses, errors, and 
>     software decay. Containers can be helpful, but they are also software 
>     that can have their own execution challenges.

I agree and all these points that I overlooked have been added to the discussion.

>   * L. 450-453: very good point.

Thanks! This has been moved to the Discussion.

#### Discussion

>  * Why both conclusions and discussion?

I felt this was the common practice. I've adapted :-)

> * This section starts with a sentence that appears to undercut the whole theme of this chapter!

I agree and restructured the text quite a bit. Things should make more sense now :-)

>   * Frankly, I'm not sure what to make about the first paragraph of this section. What is its point?

That old idea has been watered down now and I feel things make more sense now.

>  * Next few paragraphs appear to summarise the chapter, which can be good but not really discussion.

Yep, I restructured quite a bit and discussion things are now only in the Discussion :-)

>  * Good last paragraph in this section!

Thanks, I kept it in :-)

>  * Table 1 is not referenced anywhere in the paper.

Fixed.


## Review 2

> Is the chapter comprehensible for a reader not coming from the specific domain 
> the chapter is discussing?
> Bilderbeek's chapter does a nice job of introducing domain knowledge from 
> genetic epidemiology in a way that is comprehensible to the lay reader.

Thanks!

> Is the chapter clear in how it ties to the theme and topic of the volume?
> Yes, the author makes a clear declaration at the outset of the paper about 
> their understanding of the term paradata 
> [suggestions about how to hone this understanding are included below].

Thanks!

> Can you see obvious links to other chapters you think the authors could highlight more?
> Yes, there are several papers that speak to the idea that algorithms (and parts thereof) can be considered paradata. These threads of 'code as paradata' can be drawn out in the introduction to the volume and within these chapters themselves. Where these chapters differ is in the understanding of whether it is just code or code and additional process data that counts as paradata. The difference may relate to the overarching concept of interest. Viewing paradata in terms of something that allows for trust to be established in the primary data of interest (the research results of a computational experiment) hones in on code as the central component. While looking at the idea of holding people accountable for computational systems means that code is just one part of a broader ecosystem of paradata that can fulfil that function.

Thanks!

> Other comments
> I would suggest reworking the paper title. 

Thanks to yours and others' feedback, 
the title has been changed to 'Making research code useful paradata'.

> The are some minor disfluencies with the English language to be rectified 
> here and this is one of them. 

I assume this is fixed now :-)

> An elaborated definition of trust/trustworthiness should also be 
> included as that notion differs across disciplines.

This is an interesting point! The paper, however, has change 
substantially (maybe even completely?), so I feel this need has decreased. 
I hope you'll agree!

### Introduction

> In the opening paragraph the example of the two researchers and their 
> output would carry more weight if the scenario was fleshed out a 
> little more - e.g., discipline, etc.

Do so, thanks!

> Figure 1 doesn't quite succeed in representing the understanding of 
> paradata as deployed in the text. E.g., the notion that paradata 
> describes a process that feeds into the collection of data comes 
> across clearly in the text but not in figure one. 
> The same goes for the notion that paradata describes the way of collecting primary data. I'm also not sure I understand the difference between paradata as a description of a process and as a way of data collection so this could be clarified here. How metadata factors in here also needs to be briefly outlined in the introduction [I know that is covered later in the paper, but some foreshadowing would be useful here].

I hope this has been improved now, which I did mainly in the figure's legend.

### Genetic Epidemiology

> There needs to be more of an introduction to the genetic epidemiology study
>  - i.e. a short description of what the author will achieve 
> in this key section of the chapter.

I think this has been improved: to illustrate code being paradata.

### Code is More Important than the Paper

> I buy the idea that the scientific article is metadata, 
> and I think the chapter raises an interesting issue 
> about how and where credit is doled out in the research enterprise 
> [is it appropriate, for example, that most credit goes to researchers 
> for metadata about the research?]. Going back to figure 1, I also think 
> that the metadata element is represented in a way that seems too 
> dislocated from the rest of the research process.

You and the other reviewer seems to agree on that, so I've made
figure 1 more complex: the paper and the results are more
interconnected.

> The tie to knowledge management issues is a welcome addition to 
> this section but given the focus on this edited volume could be nodded to 
> earlier in the chapter [at least alluded to in the abstract?].

I hope the section about 'Preserving code' provides just for that!

### There are Multiple Ways to Publish Code and Sensitive Data

> These sections did a great job of taking the basic argument and 
> extending it to its logical conclusion. 
> I learned a lot from this section and appreciated the effort involved 
> to make rather complex ideas easier for the layperson to understand. 

I hope you still do :-)

> In this section, the idea of linking these publication approaches 
> to FAIR data needs further fleshing out. 
> It makes sense to link the two together 
> but in the narrative the introduction of 
> the concept of FAIR data seems rushed (comes a little out of left field 
> and is not fully explained).

I agree that FAIR is underexplained! After quite some rework, however,
it has even be removed from the chapter. I feel this worked out for the
better, but feel encouraged to disagree.

> There is a figure number missing on page 15.

Yep, fixed that! The reason for that was because there are actually two
versions of the PDF: one with 1 figure, for the book, and another with
plenty of figures, for an online publication.

#### Conclusion and Discussion

> The conclusion succinctly recaps the main findings of the chapter. 
> The discussion section is key as it brings the reader back 
> to the main argument of code being paradata. 
> Once the author has had the opportunity to read other completed essays 
> from this volume, the conjoined force of what has been learned 
> will help round out the ending, particularly in terms of linking 
> paradata to data processes.

Thanks!

> Finally, the nod to knowledge management at the end (that KM should 
> create the infrastructure for the preservation of runnable experiments) 
> comes somewhat out of left field. I think this potential KM contribution 
> should be signalled much earlier in the paper.

This is discussed a bit earlier now, at the 'Preserving code' section.

> Adding the GitHub link to the article and metadata shows the 
> author's investment in data accessibility.

Thanks! I decided to keep it, yet keep it short, due to the word count.

## Author instructions: Perspectives to Paradata

### General information

> The chapters will be reviewed. A final publication guarantee cannot be made before the peer-review and revision processes have been completed

[No action needed]

> Once the chapter proposal is accepted, you should prepare your final versions
according to the manuscript guidelines (“Key Style Points”) and details regarding
third-party permissions etc. as described in
https://www.springer.com/gp/authors-editors/book-authors-editors/your-publication-jo
urney/manuscript-preparation

[No action needed]

> You are encouraged to use the templates hosted on the web page 
> where you found the author instructions
> (https://www.springer.com/gp/authors-editors/book-authors-editors/your-publication-journey/manuscript-preparation)

I use that template.

> Only original chapters are accepted in the volume (no reprints, no chapters which are
from blogs etc.)

[No action needed: this content is original]

> You are responsible for sourcing any re-use permissions for your own content or any
third-party content

[No action needed: I do take responsibility for that]


### Chapter format

> An ideal length of a chapter is 5 000 words (excluding a reasonable number of
references).

Done! The chapter is 4915 words, according to https://github.com/richelbilderbeek/chapter_paradata/actions/runs/4166014852/jobs/7209797864#step:11:9

> When preparing your manuscript, please follow the chapter instructions from Springer:
> https://www.springer.com/gp/authors-editors/book-authors-editors/your-publication-journey/manuscript-preparation

I think I do, as I use the LaTeX template supplied by Springer.

> * Use the Springer SocPsych reference style as indicate in the author instructions

Done, I use the LaTeX template supplied by Springer.

> * Use any official English spelling variant and punctuation of your choice (with or without Oxford commas) in your chapter

Done, I used a British English spellchecker.

>  * Check for z versus s, e.g. plagiarise/plariarize

Done, I used a British English spellchecker.

> * The book sections should be numbered (2.x,; 2.2.x)

Done.

> Information on index terms, author bios, abstract and number of figures will be
communicated after the peer-review round

No action needed.

### Some notes on style

> Data is plural i.e. data are, not data is

Done.

> Recordkeeping, not record-keeping

Done, there is no 'recordkeeping' in this chapter.

> Try to avoid using s/he as a general pronoun, use instead plural they/their if
possible

Done, reworked to more general descriptions, e.g. 'one can think' instead of 
'he/she can think'.
